Once labeled as purely regional cinema, Bollywood movies today enjoy an international appeal and viewership. In recent days, Industry pundits and avid moviegoers have witnessed a steady stream of movies centered on Sports dramas –some inspired from real life stories and others being purely fictional. And these movies have enjoyed a greater share of success at the box office than movies of other genres, with the successes of the latest Aamir khan starrer ’Dangal’ and ‘Sultan’ before that, featuring Salman khan illustrating the point. Let’s take a detailed look at this interesting phenomenon, its origins, case studies and the compelling reasons that enable such movies to weave magic at the box office. 

1) Sports as a team effort can foster Patriotism and National unity
One of the earliest Bollywood films to have a Sports centric drama as its main theme was ‘Lagaan’ that was released way back in 2001. The film created a history of sorts becoming one of the highest grossing Indian films of all times. It went on to garner an Academy award nomination for best foreign film category in 2002 and enjoyed a successful run across the globe. The central plot of the film was a fictitious tale of a group of rebellious young villagers of Champaner, a village in the then Bombay Presidency (Gujarat) of British India, accepting a challenge against their oppressive colonial rulers to a game of cricket and eventually winning it. The premise itself was most novel and ingenious too in that the sport of cricket, which was an essentially a British invention in the first place, was cleverly used against its own inventors as a symbol of spirited defiance, albeit fictitiously. This ingenious theme clicked not only with the Indian audience but also captured the imagination of the International audience across the globe. The film particularly stroked patriotic fervor among the Indian audience by using the hugely popular sport of Cricket as a supporting tool, and thus succeeded in gaining the huge critical as well as commercial acclaim that it truly deserved.    
2) Victory of the Underdog, its appeal and inspirational value
Apart from being a mere entertainment product, when a film goes on to overwhelm and truly inspire the masses on a massive scale, then such a film is sure to break certain established records in the industry. Sports themed movies can be truly inspirational by showcasing the struggle between the seemingly powerful and the weak & downtrodden, and the subsequent victorious emergence of the latter. A classic example is the Shah rukh khan starrer ‘Chak de India’ which was released in 2007. This hugely successful film too had a fictional premise that involved a honest but disgraced veteran Hockey player – played by Khan, and a struggling and fragmented women’s team, who under the spirited leadership of Khan put aside their petty differences and ultimately emerge as winners in the World Cup championship. Khan’s team of relatively puny players had to face the strong, dominating and highly intimidating players of the Australian team, whom they had lost to in an initial match and had had to clash with in the Final match before winning the title cup. 

3) Real life Sports Icons have their own sway     
Finally, a surefire formula for box office success is to make a movie on a real life sports player who is already hugely successful and popular too. Films like ‘M.S.Dhoni the untold story’ and the Priyanka Chopra starrer ‘Mary Kom’, both hugely successful films, can be described as fitting examples for this winning formula. 
